Her Story Review
Search history
Her Story Review - IGN Image
Brian Albert Avatar
By Brian Albert
Updated: Dec 28, 2015 12:38 pm
Posted: Jun 29, 2015 8:51 pm
I’m watching an old police interview. I can’t see or hear the detective, but the woman answering the questions is right in front of me. She’s reserved and shy, but polite. I can tell she doesn’t want to be there.

Then I click on another video in the archive. It’s the same woman. The tape’s timecode tells me it’s a different day, but I don’t need to be told. She’s energetic now. Her short-sleeved shirt reveals a snake tattoo on her arm. It bobs up and down as she strums a guitar. With a smile, she sings an unnerving folk song about a jealous woman who drowns her sister.

This is the core experience of Her Story, a wonderful, brave video game unlike anything I’ve played before. The woman above has a dead husband, and she’s a suspect. As such, she’s also an unreliable narrator by default, so her story can change from video to video. My job is to wade through dozens of old, archived clips and decide what she may or may not have done. Her alibis, her body language, her reactions – they all contribute to a great, dense story that stayed in my mind days after I’d seen the end.
In Her Story, what you don’t know is as important as what you do. You’re not even told exactly who you are; you’re logged into a 90s-looking police computer as “AUTH_GUEST.” For reasons I don’t want to spoil, it’s clear you’re looking through these videos long after the murder investigation has finished… so what’s the purpose of it all? From the start, there’s an unshakeable air of mystery that permeates and enriches the entire experience.

Her Story’s main game mechanic is essentially a search engine, which let me chase down leads, investigate old claims, or validate my theories. You type in a word or phrase, and any video containing that word or phrase pops up. It’s a simple, gratifying tool, and it gives Her Story a different pace when compared to other adventure games.

Everything you could want to know is available from the start, but you won’t know which words are important to focus on until you spend some time with the suspect. From there, the only barrier between you and what you need to know is what you type into the search bar. It’s refreshing to make progress based on what you learn or feel, and not on what you collect.

The issue with this system is that when I was occasionally stumped, I’d search for common words like “she,” “to,” and “went,” and sometimes the results brought up new videos without me deducing anything. It wasn’t a movie-perfect EUREKA! moment. I literally just guessed, and those guesses led to legitimate leads when the trail I’d “earned” went cold.

If Her Story hadn’t let me do that, I would have missed out on at least 15 important videos, but the effectiveness of simple guessing undermined the sense that I was working my own way through a mystery.
her story screens
The interviews are recorded in full-motion video. A real actress, Viva Seifert, plays the woman, and her performance is appropriately both grounded and absurd. Her Story respectfully deals with mature themes such as mental illness, identity, loss, and infidelity. We don’t quite know who she is or what she’s going through, but we’re there to hear her well-told story, warts and all. Across dozens of videos, Seifert nails her performance as a troubled widow.

I ended the game with over 10 pages of story notes that would seem crazy to anyone who found them. I had one page dedicated to people, locations, and times. Another for inconsistencies. Several more were paraphrased transcriptions. Most, however, were nonsense bits like these:

    Can’t get the bloodstains out.
    Reflection? How would the party hat work?
    He has a thing for blondes.
    If the DOLLS have passports…

I later compared notes with a coworker, who had equally terrifying scribbles. I won’t ruin your experience by going into details.

This is all to say, Her Story had the complete attention of two people – both of whom took copious notes – and each person came away with different yet totally viable theories. Video game stories often don’t hold up to that kind of scrutiny, or don’t leave much room for interpretation, which makes Her Story’s success all the more impressive.
Verdict

Despite it being born from originality, I hope other developers copy Her Story’s blueprint. Not the exact story, of course, but the idea that people who play games are smart, and can take on tough, intellectual work if you give them a story worth working for. With a strong script, great use of FMV, and a simple yet empowering core game mechanic, Her Story is the most unique game I’ve played in years.