

r/movies
JayDunzo
Eternal Sunshine Of The Spotless Mind is one of the best movies I've ever seen

This might make it into my all time top 5 of American cinema. I saw this when it came out because I was a huge fan of Michel Gondry's music videos. At the time, I didn't understand any of the plot, and I wasn't a fan of love stories, so naturally I didn't like it. I was 20 then. Now at 40, I watched it an immediately wondered what the hell was wrong with me back then. This movie is a poetic, cosmic tearjerker. I've never seen a movie that has made me feel so simultaneously happy and sad.

Jim Carrey STEALS it. Kate Winslet is incredible, and I feel bad for gravitating toward's Jim's performance because her's is also super sincere and intense. But the real star is Michel Gondry's writing and direction/vision. The filmmaking is perfect. It's a surrealist masterpiece of love. All the poetry, visuals, speeches, humor, combining grief with happy memories, and the sci-fi backbone story of the memory erasure company. It's so disjointed, but somehow works so well. He's made other films that don't work nearly as well, but wow. It was such a joy to rediscover this movie. It's odd that such a glum and depressing film can be so funny and cozy at the same time. Yeah, it's art. Only criticism is it could have used a person of color or two





SpruceDickspring
•
2y ago

I think the ending is actually optimistic. Them hearing the tapes of their complaints and accusations towards each other actually allows them to break free of the cycle they've been caught in within their dating lives.

Clementine's acknowledgement of 'I'll get bored with you and feel trapped, because that's what happens with me' is really a moment of self-reflection which you'd assume, she'd aim to address before her next relationship falls apart. Joel's simple 'Okay' as a response is in stark contrast to how he treated the relationship previously where he was desperately trying to quell Clementine's impulsive nature. However harsh, they have the blueprint to how their previous relationship failed, so there's an assumption that they now won't make the same mistakes twice.

I don't particularly buy in to the theory that they continue to do the relationship/memory loss procedure cycle over and over again because they know how it all works now and seemingly wouldn't want to go through the process again. Also the producers kind of confirmed this wasn't the case by confirming that this was the original ending to the script.




r/movies icon
Go to movies
r/movies
•
2 yr. ago
HughJarse8
The Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind is one of my all time faves, but I still don’t understand the ending.
Discussion

What are you views on the ending? I think I’ve settled on believing that Joel and Clementine will continue to live out a “new” relationship forever, until it inevitably fails and they are left running the same cycle over and over again.

I feel like the way the film is left at the end is so open to interpretation that there must be hundreds of different theories for the way the characters go at the end. It’s a great film to rewatch too as I seem to pick up new things every time that I’ve never noticed before.
